Welcome to this edition of the Inside Story.
Today, we will get to know six of the 48 students representing the 156th Class of Gilead.
To my left, I have Sister Hanta Razaf Mandimbi from Madagascar.
Next to Hanta is Adalia and Manny Luna from the United States.
To my far right is Simon and Yoshi Hori from Japan.
And last but not least, we have Brother Marco Caproni from Italy.
Welcome to all six of you.
And we look forward to hearing what you have to share with us today.
Why don't we start by first hearing how long you've been in your respective Bethels
and what your current assignments are?
Why don't we start with you, Hanta?
I've been serving at Madagascar Bethel for 24 years.
Nice.
And currently I'm serving in one of the translation teams there.
Excellent. Adalia.
We are currently serving in the United States branch, Joaquil Complex for about 13 years.
And my assignment is actually a split assignment between food service and health care department.
Okay, very good. Manny.
And I, along with Adalia, have been serving at the United States branch for about 13 years.
And I currently work with the service department.
Very good.
Let's switch over to you, Simon, please.
I have been in the Japan branch for 16 years.
And my assignment is the computer department.
Okay, very good. And Yoshi?
And I've been in the Japan branch for six years.
And now I serve in the legal department.
Okay, very good. And please, Marco.
I've been serving an Italy branch in Rome for 18 years.
And actually I'm serving in the public information department.
Excellent. Well, now that we've got a chance to learn a little bit about you,
let's start off with Simon.
Simon, I understand that you are baptized at 10 years of age.
Yeah.
Can you tell us about what your father did to help you make spiritual progress at such a young age?
Well, my father was very creative.
Explain.
For example, as a family, we enjoyed playing a game, named Bible Golf.
Okay.
It's a simple game.
So the winner is whoever can open to a specific Bible verse in the fewest attempt.
So if I can open the verse in the first attempt, it's a hole in one.
All right.
And three attempts, it's a buddy.
Something like this.
And another game I can still remember is Jehovah's Witnesses Game of Life,
which is a bold game with two circles on it.
And you can start from outside circle, which represents non-witness life.
Non-witness life.
Okay.
And if you progress properly, Bible study, and dedication, assembly, or convention,
then you can enter into inner circle, which represents witness life.
But there is a time limit called Armageddon.
So when the alarm goes off, you can enter into paradise if you are in the inner circle.
And it's so much fun because there are also something blocks along the way.
And your father came up with this game.
Yes.
Obviously he was very creative.
Did he do anything else to help you?
Well, the knowledge book came out.
He asked me and my sister if we wanted to get baptized within six months.
And we said yes.
From then on, each morning, he would leave the house, knock on the door,
introduce himself as brother Hori, and conduct a Bible study with us.
And we have to serve tea for him.
Now I understand he wanted to teach us the Bible study is a serious thing in our life.
It's unique, but I was able to get baptized within a year.
Well, obviously it worked because you are with us today.
Well, once you were baptized, was it always smooth sailing for you Simon?
Honestly, no, not always.
As I grew older, I started struggling because I wanted to be exemplarily in congregation,
but I liked computer very much.
So I wanted to be an engineer in an IT company.
It was a big dream, huh?
Yeah, okay.
But eventually, the Timothy drama came out.
And in that drama, the apostle Paul encouraged Timothy not to use his skill in sailing world, but for Jehovah.
That was the turning point for me.
Instead of pursuing secular work, I started pioneering.
And then I came to love it.
Let's talk to your wife Yoshi for just a moment.
Now Yoshi, you were born in Japan, but I understand that you and your family moved around a bit.
Can you tell us a little bit about that?
Yes, so my father, he wasn't a witness at the time, and his work necessitated that we move around quite a bit.
So I remember I was five when we were living in Osaka in Japan.
Then we moved to London in Britain.
We were there for four years.
And then after that, we all moved to Scotland.
So I lived in Glasgow for five years.
After that, we all moved back to Tokyo.
And later, when I was an adult, I moved on my own to serve where the need was great in Tanzania.
I stayed there for six years.
I moved back and now we're here.
And we're happy to have you.
Now you've got to live in some pretty fascinating places over those years.
What did you learn about yourself and culture from living in those places?
Well, you know, when I was young, I honestly didn't really appreciate it.
But now that I've grown older, I feel that it's taught me to understand that there's so many different ways of looking at something in so many different ways of doing something.
But actually, all of them are really, really good.
And it's a blessing to have so many different personalities with us.
And I just love working with these variety of brothers and sisters now.
Oh, obviously looking back on it, you learned quite a bit.
Thank you for sharing that.
Let's switch over to you now, Hanta.
Now I understand that you were not raised as one of Jehovah's Witnesses.
Can you tell us a little bit about your background, please?
I was raised in a religious family.
We used to go to a Protestant church every week.
And my siblings and I even attended Sunday school for a while.
Okay. Now, although your father never became one of Jehovah's Witnesses, how was he instrumental in leading you to the truth?
My father welcomed anyone who knocked at our door in the name of religion.
And Jehovah's Witnesses were among these people.
Every time they stopped by, they would leave magazines, books, brochures.
What I really appreciate in those publications is God's promise of a paradise Earth.
I really like the pictures of paradise in those publications.
So much so that my siblings and I would trace those pictures, paint them, and hang them on the wall.
Your parents were okay with you re-decorating like this.
One day our father bought the leaf forever book from the Witnesses.
It was then that the Bible study was started.
From the first meeting I attended, I was so impressed by the warm welcome I received that I said to myself,
I want to belong to these people.
Eventually all my siblings and I, along with our mother, embraced the truth.
Actually, one of my brothers and I got baptized together on the same day.
That must have been really special for you.
Thank you for sharing that with the Santa.
We'll come back to you. Let's go over to Adalia now.
Adalia, you were born, raised, and spent your early teenage years in Brooklyn, New York.
How was that for you growing up around World Headquarters?
It was a beautiful, positive experience.
Getting to see self-sacrificing brothers and sisters give all they could to Jehovah
and also see how happy and excited they were in their service was a beautiful example.
This helped instill in me goals and really plant seeds and put in me the desire to want to live that same kind of life.
We could understand that.
Now eventually, you and your family moved to Florida.
That's where you met Manny.
You two were eventually married.
You should have stayed in Brooklyn, see?
You met Manny and you two were married.
What next?
So shortly after we got married before our first year anniversary, we started regular pioneering.
Then after that, we were invited to serve with Anita's great in a very rural part of Florida.
The Orange Grove region, very different to what we both grew up.
We were both used to the city life, but we went to that area and immersed ourselves with the congregation.
Beautiful, young congregation who worked hard in the ministry
and we grew to really love those brothers and Jehovah blessed the hard work that was being done in that area.
How long were you there?
We were there for ten years and during that time period, that one congregation that we were at actually turned into five congregations.
Five congregations, over ten years, excellent.
Now Manny, clearly, yourself and Adalia, you were busy in Jehovah's service.
Was that the end of the extent of your pursuing theocratic goals?
No, not at all. Adalia and I made an effort to live a simple life so that we could give all we could to Jehovah without any distractions.
That allowed us to pioneer, it also allowed us to move to that area where there was greater need.
But to further make ourselves available, we applied to Bethel several times.
Okay, that's a little nebulous.
Several times, how many times did you apply to Bethel?
It was only twelve times.
Twelve times. What part of know did you not understand?
No, please tell us.
What caused you to keep applying when you weren't receiving a response to come?
As you can see, certainly, we were very persistent.
We wanted to keep our options open and allowed Jehovah to decide where we would serve.
But you know when we looked back at it, we realized that applying to Bethel all those times and not getting accepted was just simply because it wasn't our time.
What do you mean by that? Was it your time?
There we were in our assignment, but wanting to be at Bethel.
Jehovah knew we had a lot to learn and he allowed that assignment to give us the training that we needed.
And those twelve applications or those twelve times that we applied taught us a lot, taught us patience, taught us to wait on Jehovah, taught us appreciation.
Even though we wanted to make ourselves available to do more by means of Bethel service, there was a lot of lessons that we still needed to learn.
We needed to learn to focus, love and appreciate the privileges we already had up to that point in order to be able to fully appreciate our future Bethel assignment.
And what a blessing it was, being with those brothers and sisters for those years and being able to witness that growth.
It was amazing and we finally looked back at it and certainly are memories that we truly treasure.
Well, those are some valuable lessons that you learned.
We're glad that Jehovah gave you that training. We're sure it has served you well.
Let's shift over to you now, Marco.
Would you mind telling us a little bit about your family background?
Sure. So growing up I was raised as a Catholic and I used to go every Sunday to the church.
Yes. But then when I was seventeen years old my uncle began to study the Bible with Jehovah's Witnesses and observing the big changes that it made in his life, in good.
And how happy he became, maybe really curious about the Bible.
What's a powerful book? Now it is to change life in such a way.
And so I accepted to study the Bible as well and when I was nineteen years old I got baptized.
And later on I started the service as a regular pioneer.
I attended the ministry at Trinity School or the MTS.
And yes, as I told you, for the last eighteen years I've been serving a bettered in Rome.
Okay, excellent. Now during your time here at Gilead it became clear that you have a real love for history, Marco.
We all thought, was there anything that was part of the Gilead curriculum that particularly caught your attention?
Yes. Here at Gilead we have many artifacts on display.
But there is something in particular that caught my attention and I brought it here to show you.
Really? Does the Gilead office know that you have this?
I will bring it back, sure.
Where do we have?
It's a coin.
Okay, tell us about it.
This coin is authentic coin minted by Emperor Niro in 66th Common Era.
He wanted to celebrate a period of peace.
In fact, if you look carefully on one side you can see one door.
Okay, I can see that but can you all see this?
Oh, okay. Oh, where is it? There it is.
So this door is the door of ancient temple in Rome.
And this door was kept closed during the period of peace.
And if a Niro wanted to boast that it was capable to bring peace into the empire.
But there was 66th Common Era and the prophecy of Jesus about the destruction of Jerusalem had to be fulfilled.
There it is.
But few months after minting this coin, Niro was forced to send the military army down to Judea to settle the Jewish revolt.
And this fact we know that led to the destruction of Jerusalem and the temple in 70th Common Era.
So you see, a coin like this can remind us a precious lesson that Bible prophecies always fulfill.
Even though propaganda of this war can say differently.
Nice lesson.
I see that you like this story. Would you like to know more about Bible history and Rome?
Of course.
I have a short video to watch together.
Let's see it.
Visiting some of the archaeological sites of Italy can help us to imagine what life was like for the early Christians.
Would you like to come with me for a quick tour?
Let's begin here.
Located about 10 kilometers or 6 miles west of Naples, was the ancient poor city of Puthulai.
Today it is known as Potswali.
In about 59 C.E., the Apostle Paul arrived here by boat as a prisoner.
From here, Paul will now begin the long journey to Rome, where he would eventually stand before Caesar himself.
One of the most famous Roman highways is called the Appian Way.
It averages 6 meters or 20 feet in width.
And was paved with large lava blocks.
It was on this very road that pulled travel to the city of Rome.
Along the way, Paul eventually came to a busy 3D center known as the Marketplace of Apius.
And a leader for the north was a rest area, like an inn, known as the Three Taverns.
Having heard about Paul coming, Christians from Rome organized a group of brothers to meet the Apostle aboard of these stops.
Acts 28-15 tells us that, upon seeing them, Paul thanked God and took courage.
Next, we come to the impressive ruins of Boston, Tika.
This was Rome's most important port. It is about 25 kilometers or 16 miles southwest of Rome.
We get a glimpse of Roman life back then, with this multi-story apartment buildings known as Insule,
along with temples, theatres, thermal baths, and shops.
Walking through the old streets, it's easy to imagine our brothers witnessing to the people.
Perhaps they stopped to eat at a food shop similar to this one, called Thermopolyur, where you could buy bread, wine, roasted meat, cheese, and have some refreshment.
Next, we arrive in Rome, where perhaps the most well-known monument stands.
Yes, you guessed it, the Colosseum.
The Mamoth structure was built in the first century CE, with a seating capacity estimated to be from 40,000 to 87,000 persons.
This was Rome's entertainment center.
There were mainly two types of games or exhibitions, combat between two gladiators and the hunting of wild animals.
The criminals were also put to death here. Interestingly, entry to the Colosseum was free.
This was part of the policy of the Amperors, who offered free entertainment in order to keep the people under control.
In reality, these pedacles were like a drug that corrupted people's consciences.
Through Christians back then, courageously refused to take any part as spectators.
By the way, do you know where the Romans got the funds to build this huge stadium?
It came from the conquest of Jerusalem in 70 CE.
In fact, there is even an inscription at the Colosseum that reads,
The Amperors tied to Caesar, Vespasian Augustus, ordered the new amphitheater to be made from the proceeds from the sale of the booty.
To remember this important event, Emperor Domitian had a Trojan full arch built in honor of his brother Titus, who conquered Jerusalem and later became Emperor.
If you look carefully, you can see a bus relift with a scene of Roman soldiers carrying the spoils from Jerusalem, with a lampstand taken from Jehovah's Temple.
The arch stands today as a clear fulfillment of Jesus' words about the destruction of Jerusalem and the Temple.
So you see, if we use the Bible as a map, even the stones can be silent witnesses that the Bible is a book of true history, true life and true prophecies.
I hope you enjoyed the tour.
Thank you for taking us on that wonderful tour, Marco.
After seeing that video, we all want to go to Italy ourselves. Don't we see those sites in person? Be prepared.
So, Maddie, let's come back to you now. What has been the highlight of your Gilea training?
You know, I wasn't raised in the truth. So as a teenager, I was interested in making sure I improved my situation by means of secular education.
I thought education was the answer. I thought it was my ticket out. And boy, did Jehovah fool me?
How so?
Well, secular education wasn't the answer, but education was. Jehovah knew I needed the very best education, the vine education.
And the truth is that what I've learned from our grand instructor, Jehovah, surpasses by far anything that the secular education could have provided me.
It's truly helped me see that, in fact, the education that Jehovah provides us makes us better people.
So in Gilea's school, I have been able to appreciate how Jehovah has continued to train us and provide us with something that's helpful not only to myself but to others.
And honestly, I'm really grateful that I've had this opportunity to get better acquainted with my Heavenly Father.
Oh, well stated. Now tell us the final question to you. How do you plan on using in your assignment, which you've learned at Gilea?
I would tend to steer or guide myself toward guidelines, but Gilea has taught me that while guidelines are important,
I can't lose sight of what's more important to Jehovah, and that's people.
Yes.
And Jesus knew that, and he saw that. Therefore, I want to imitate Jesus in my dealings with people.
When he was on earth, who knew the rules better than Jesus?
Yet, what was his focus? People. He put people first. He loved them. He didn't hold that against them.
In my assignment, I hope to imitate Jesus fully in that I can balance guidelines with principles, but never losing sight of loving Jehovah's people.
Oh, that's beautiful. Nice lesson learned. Thank you for sharing that.
In fact, why don't we get an expression from the rest of you on those very same questions? How about you, Adalia? What has been the highlight of your Gilea training?
To be honest with you, Brother Chilson, I came to Gilea very scared and apprehensive of the unknown.
Not knowing what our future assignment might be was very unsettling to me, but after several lessons, I feel positive and better equipped for what the future holds for us.
We did a deep dive into the sermon on the Mount, and one particular illustration touched me.
Matthew 7, verse 9 and 10, Jesus asks which father, when his son asks for a fish, would hand him a serpent.
Now, his listeners understood that a fish could resemble a serpent, so that illustration took on a little bit more meaning.
Even though a son could have been initially deceived if he received a serpent, a loving father would never do such a thing.
So I realize that my Heavenly Father Jehovah would never give me something bad and make it appear as something good.
So after meditating on this, I realize that Jehovah will only give me something that will be beneficial for us, and whatever he asks, it will only be for my eternal happiness.
Ah, that's beautiful. Yeah, we pray that you have success in that. In the final question for you, Adalia, how do you hope to use in your assignment what you've learned at Gilea?
I know our brothers and sisters are going through a lot. I want to be able to help strengthen their faith.
The way mine has been built, by sharing with them things that I've learned in school, and also just by living examples,
being a living example for them, and also making sure that they understand whatever challenge or trial that they face, Jehovah will sustain them.
There's no doubt about it. So with all that being said, I know that we're ready for whatever the future holds for us.
And the way my faith has been strengthened, it's my treasure, my possession that I'm never going to let go of.
Ah, that's beautiful. Thank you for sharing with us.
Hanta, let's ask you that question. What has been the highlight of Gilea training for you?
I've learned many times, I've read in our publications, many times, that Jehovah never fails to reward his faithful ones.
But Gilea helped me to understand that more fully.
What do you mean?
For example, Jehovah used Nebuchadnezzar to conquer Tyre, but Nebuchadnezzar and his men did not get many things, many riches from Tyre.
So it was as if Jehovah told him Nebuchadnezzar, thank you very much for your labor for me.
Here I give you treasures from Egypt. Nebuchadnezzar was not his servant, but he rewarded him for the labor he did for him.
So if Jehovah can't do that to someone who is not worshiping him, how much more so will he reward those who are loyal to him?
So that really is trying for me.
Oh, what a beautiful lesson you learned. Thank you. Thank you for sharing that.
And final question to you, Hanta, how do you plan on using what you've learned in your assignment from what you've gathered here at Gilea?
Yes, when a sister comes to me with her problem, I quickly think of a solution even when the sister is still speaking.
But Gilea told me to listen, to show empathy.
The person may not need a solution at all. Maybe what she needs is a listening ear.
But when help is needed, I'm determined to use Bible principle, to reason with the person and allow the person to draw the conclusion.
So I allow the person to draw conclusion as well.
We wish you success in that, Hanta. Thank you so much for sharing that with us.
Simon, let's go over to you. What has been the highlight of your Gilea training?
For me, the growing spiritual course lessons have a huge impact.
I even changed my prayer a little bit.
For example, I used to pray to Jehovah, please help me to show love to my wife and friends and brothers and sisters.
Good prayer, great prayer.
But it's a little bit vague. But now I understand what love is specifically.
Love is unselfish cruelty, focusing on doing good to others, regardless of the merit of the recipient or any benefit I could get back.
So now I know that when I pray to Jehovah to show love, I am asking for help to be more unselfish person.
That's beautiful. That's a good lesson you've learned.
Now tell us how do you plan on using in your assignment what you've gathered here at Gilea?
You know, the Gilea training made me understand that why I loved computers so much.
We have to know more about that. What do you mean?
Because I can program the computers how they work and they will just work.
But people are not like that. They are unpredictable.
And they don't always do what I want them to do.
So because of this, when I am focusing on something technical, it is not always easy for me to switch my mind to love people.
So my goal is to love people that way Jehovah loves them. Remembering they are doing their best as I am.
Good lesson learned. Thank you for sharing that with us. Let's talk to your wife now, Eoshi.
What has been the highlight of your Gilea training?
Yeah. Well, I'm seeing the footage of the spirit in a way that I never thought of before.
Can I give you an example?
Please.
So our culture is generally viewed as being humble and polite.
Gilea has taught me that that kind of humility, though, is not a result of the Holy Spirit or a footage of the Holy Spirit.
Gilea has taught me that humility, love, kindness, all those good qualities.
They have to come from much, much deeper down, not culture or your natural tendency or personality.
It has to be driven by Jehovah, by his Holy Spirit, for it to be a footage of the Holy Spirit.
In that understanding of Jehovah helping us in our good points, that just really blew my mind.
Okay. Nice.
So how do you plan on using in your assignment what you've learned at Gilea at Eoshi?
Yes. So the Holy Spirit power is very strong.
So my goal is when I get to my new assignment, is to be able to expand my comfort zone by denouncing what Jehovah's help,
so that I can be more people oriented, and I can be comfortable with people, and I hope they'll be comfortable with me, too.
We have every confidence that they will be. Well done, Yoshi. Thank you.
Now finally, Marco, you're our last one here. So what has been the highlight of your Gilea training?
I think that Gilea helped me to love the Bible even more.
I realized that digging into it, the more I studied the Bible, the more I found new things to learn that I didn't imagine.
And I could compare the Bible now to a suitcase with a double or triple bottom layer, and full of things.
And because the more I look into it, the more I can take out more things that maybe I didn't see at the beginning.
So the lesson for me is that when I study the Bible, I should slow down, take my time to meditate, find the different angles, study all the aspects.
Because nothing in the Bible is random or written by chance.
Nice, nice lesson, you've learned there. And how do you plan on using in your assignment what you've learned?
Yes, I think to be aware of how rich is the Bible will help me in any assignment.
I'm more convinced that in any circumstances, I will face in the future new circumstances, could be challenging or unexpected.
I think that the only thing I have to do is to go back to the Bible and look for a similar situation or a lesson or a Bible principle that can apply.
Because I'm sure that Jehovah has a loving father, has already written in the Bible everything that I need.
Excellent, well done, and we'll pray for your success in that too, Marco.
Well, we have thoroughly enjoyed getting to know the six of you better and we appreciate so much you sharing with us your personal expressions.
We echo the words of the Apostle Paul written at 2 Timothy, chapter 4, verse 22, when he said,
The Lord be with the Spirit you show. His undeserved kindness be with you.
It is our prayer that Jehovah's rich blessing continue upon you six and the rest of your Gilead Class 156.
And to all of you in our viewing audience, thank you for joining us.
We look forward to being with you again on the next edition of the Inside Story.